automatic troubleshooting endpoint context docs (#728)
elastic/endpoint-package: package/endpoint/docs/knowledge_base/endpoint_exceptions/endpoint_exceptions_not_working.md

---
type: automatic_troubleshooting
sub_type: endpoint_exceptions
link: https://www.elastic.co/docs/solutions/security/manage-elastic-defend/optimize-elastic-defend
date: '2026-03-11'
---

## Symptom

> An Endpoint Alert Exception has been created in Elastic Defend, but the endpoint continues to generate alerts or block processes that should be excluded. Alert documents matching the exception criteria still appear in `logs-endpoint.alerts-*`.

Reviewer: We should add another doc for when Alert documents do not appear in `logs-endpoint.alerts-*`
* A shipping error from Endpoint
* A configuration error in Kafka or Logstash
* Actually Endpoint isn't actively blocking activity, it's caused by some sort of interaction with another AV or process -- targeted Trusted Apps is the most common solution

- **Trailing whitespace or invisible characters**: Values copied from spreadsheets or ticketing systems sometimes include trailing spaces or non-breaking space characters that are invisible in the UI but cause a literal mismatch.
- **Wrong field name**: Using `file.path` (the file being acted upon) when the alert populates `process.executable` (the running binary), or vice versa. Check the actual alert document in `logs-endpoint.alerts-*` to confirm which fields are populated and what values they contain.
- **Keyword vs text field type**: If the exception references a field mapped as `text` (analyzed, tokenized) rather than `keyword` (exact value), the match behavior may differ. Exception entries work against the raw field values stored by the endpoint, so verify the field mapping in the alert index.

To diagnose: query `logs-endpoint.alerts-*` for a recent alert that should have been suppressed. Compare each field and value in the exception entry against the actual alert document fields character-by-character.

### Exception scoped to wrong integration policy

> Endpoint Alert Exceptions can be scoped to specific integration policies ("per policy") or applied globally. If the exception is assigned to a policy that does not cover the affected endpoint, it has no effect on that endpoint.

Reviewer: This is not true. We plan to ship per-policy exceptions in 9.4 and that'll be opt-in.

This limit can be set by changing the [index.mapping.nested_objects.limit] index level setting.
```

When the manifest task cannot commit, **no artifact updates are distributed to any endpoint**. This means newly created exceptions, trusted apps, blocklist entries, and other changes silently stop reaching endpoints. Existing artifacts on endpoints continue to work, but any additions or modifications have no effect until the pipeline is restored.

To diagnose: check Kibana logs for the error above. If present, increase the limit:

1. Create a role with `all` privileges on `.kibana_security_solution*` with `allow_restricted_indices: true`.
2. As a user with that role, run: `PUT /.kibana_security_solution/_settings { "index": { "mapping": { "nested_objects": { "limit": 20000 } } } }`.
3. Monitor Kibana logs for "Committed manifest" messages, which indicate the manifest task is recovering and distributing artifacts again.

If the limit is still exceeded after raising it to 20000, increase further in increments of 10000. Deployments with hundreds of policies and thousands of artifact entries may need 30000 or higher.

### Exception on wrong cluster in cross-cluster search (CCS) setups

> In architectures where Fleet-managed agents send data to a "data cluster" and analysts query via CCS from a separate "analyst cluster", Endpoint Alert Exceptions must be created on the data cluster (the one running Fleet Server). Exceptions created on the analyst cluster are not distributed to endpoints because CCS does not support Fleet Actions.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
In some architectures Fleet-managed agents are managed via an "analyst cluster" but write bulk data to a "data cluster".. In these architectures, analysts query data via CCS from the data cluster, Endpoint Alert Exceptions must be created on the analyst cluster (the one running Fleet Server). Exceptions created on the data cluster are not distributed to endpoints because CCS does not support Fleet Actions.
```

> If exceptions exist only on the analyst cluster, alert documents will continue to be generated by endpoints and indexed on the data cluster. The analyst cluster will then alert on those documents via CCS.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
If exceptions exist only on the data cluster, alert documents will continue to be generated by endpoints and indexed on the data cluster. The analyst cluster will then alert on those documents via CCS.
```

To fix: create the Endpoint Alert Exceptions on the same cluster where Fleet Server is running and where Elastic Agents are enrolled. After the manifest task commits and endpoints pull the updated artifacts, the alerts should stop being generated at the source.

### Exception not suppressing Kibana detection rule alerts

Endpoint Alert Exceptions suppress alerts generated by the endpoint itself — they prevent the endpoint from creating alert documents in `logs-endpoint.alerts-*`. However, if a Kibana detection rule (e.g. the prebuilt "Malware Detection Alert" rule) is configured to fire on endpoint alert documents, that Kibana rule generates its own separate alert documents.

If the endpoint exception is working correctly (no new documents in `logs-endpoint.alerts-*`), but alerts still appear in the Kibana Alerts page, the source is the Kibana detection rule, not the endpoint. In this case, add a Detection Rule Exception on the Kibana rule itself, or disable the redundant detection rule.

> To distinguish: check the `kibana.alert.rule.rule_type_id` field. Endpoint-generated alerts have `event.module: endpoint` and `event.dataset: endpoint.alerts`. Kibana detection rule alerts have fields like `kibana.alert.rule.category: "Custom Query Rule"` and `kibana.alert.rule.producer: "siem"`.

Reviewer: This whole section makes no sense. It's not possible for the SIEM rule to create an alert if there is no underlying Endpoint alert in `logs-endpoint.alerts-*`.

Maybe we mean to say alerts created by most SIEM rules need SIEM exceptions not Endpoint exceptions?

### Protection mode confusion: detect vs prevent

When malware protection is set to "detect" mode, the endpoint generates alert documents but does not block execution. If a user reports that a legitimate application is being "blocked" while in detect mode, the blocking may come from a different protection feature:

- **Attack Surface Reduction (credential hardening)**: This protection does not have a "detect" mode — it always prevents. If `attack_surface_reduction.credential_hardening.enabled` is `true` in the policy, it can block installers and other processes regardless of the malware protection mode setting.

> - **Malware On Write scanning**: Files can be quarantined or blocked during write operations even in detect mode if another protection layer (e.g. memory protection in prevent mode) intervenes.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
```

> - **Malware On Write scanning**: Files can be quarantined or blocked during write operations even in detect mode if another protection layer (e.g. memory protection in prevent mode) intervenes.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- **Inter-Application Incompatibility**: Sometimes it seems like Endpoint is blocking system activity because of a false positive but actually its caused by an incompatibility between Endpoint and another application on the host. If alerts are being ingested into Elasticsearch in other scenarios from the same host this points to an incompatibility as the underlying cause. A targeted Trusted App entry is a common solution. If Malware protection is enabled, use `curl https://secure.eicar.org/eicar.com.txt --output [eicar.com](http://eicar.com/).txt` to test if alerts are being ingested into Elasticsearch.
```

Maybe my note on testing with EICAR should go somewhere else?
